= Setting Up Linux for Use With TLSPretense

To run TLSPretense on Linux, you need a system that has two network interfaces.
This Linux system could run from a virtual machine, or it could run on a laptop
and use the laptop's wifi card as a wireless access point to test.

The following setup will use a Linux host to run TLSPretense, and it will
configure netfilter to be a NAT with statically managed IP address on its
internal network.

TODO: How to host a DHCP server on certain systems.

== Configuring Linux to act as a NAT/router/gateway

The first step is to configure the Linux system's routing with IPTables. The
following script will turn the system into a NAT router. TLSPretense will then
later add and remove iptables rules as needed in order to intercept network
traffic during testing.

In this script, we assume +eth0+ is the external interface that can connect to
the original destination, and +eth1+ is the internal interface that the client
system will connect to.

    #!/bin/sh
    external=eth0
    internal=eth1

    iptables --flush
    iptables --table nat --flush
    iptables --delete-chain
    iptables --table nat --delete-chain


    echo "Manually setup the internal network's nic"
    ifconfig $internal 192.168.42.1 netmask 255.255.255.0 

    echo "Enable packet forwarding"
    echo 1 > /proc/sys/net/ipv4/ip_forward

    echo "Apply basic iptables rules to create a NAT"
    iptables -t nat -A POSTROUTING -o $external -j MASQUERADE

    echo "Done! TLSPretense will automatically add and remove the rules for redirecting traffic."

Here we choose 192.168.42.* as the internal network IP address range.

Check to make sure that the TLSPretense host is able to access the internet
over the external interface, and that it can look up hostnames.

TODO: handling wireless ({although Mallory already has a
guide}[https://bitbucket.org/IntrepidusGroup/mallory/wiki/Wifi_Hotspot_Setup])

== Configure the Client's Host

Next, the system that will run the client code needs to be configured to use
the TLSPretense host as its gateway. This usually involves configuring the
system's network connection with information like the following:

    Address: 192.168.42.100
    Gateway: 192.168.42.1
    Subnet mask: 255.255.255.0

You will also need to configure the client's DNS with a known good DNS server.

